Add blog post: Teaching LLMs When to Use Their Skills (#3310)
huggingface/blog: upskiller-skill-invocation-env.md

---
title: "Training LLMs when to use skills with agentic environments"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/upskiller/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: mpnikhil
---

## TL;DR

We built an RL environment where an agent faces a task and a skill catalog, decides which skills to load into a limited context budget, optionally unloads irrelevant ones, and submits an answer. A five-component rule-based reward trains the agent to be selective and correct, mapping cleanly onto GRPO without a learned reward model.

This is how it works in action:

```python
from skill_invocation_env import SkillInvocationEnv, SkillInvocationAction

with SkillInvocationEnv(base_url="https://mpnikhil-skill-invocation-env.hf.space") as env:
    result = env.reset()
    skill_id = result.observation.skill_catalog[0]["id"]
    result = env.step(SkillInvocationAction(action_type="load", skill_id=skill_id))
    result = env.step(SkillInvocationAction(action_type="submit", answer="solution"))
    print(f"Reward: {result.reward}")
```

> The environment is deployed as a public HF Space using the [OpenEnv protocol](https://github.com/huggingface/openenv). Any training loop that speaks HTTP can connect and sample episodes. Three actions — **load**, **unload**, **submit** — and a five-component reward that scores correctness, skill selection precision, recall, context bloat, and cumulative token waste.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The environment is deployed as a public HF Space using the [OpenEnv protocol](https://github.com/huggingface/openenv). Any training loop that speaks HTTP can connect and sample episodes. It supports three actions — **load**, **unload**, **submit** — and uses a five-component reward that scores: correctness, skill selection precision, recall, context bloat, and cumulative token waste.
```

(just for additional clarity)

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

## Introduction

> Skills give LLM agents something tools cannot: procedural knowledge at a higher level of abstraction. Concretely, a skill is a directory of curated context — instructions, examples, and metadata — that teaches an agent how to perform a specific workflow. Where tools execute discrete actions (call an API, run a query), Skills teach an agent how to reason through entire workflows — proprietary protocols, binary formats, deployment sequences — through in-context learning from curated procedural text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Skills give LLM agents something tools cannot: procedural knowledge at a higher level of abstraction. Concretely, a skill is a directory of curated context (instructions, examples, and metadata) that teaches an agent how to perform a specific workflow. Where tools execute discrete actions (call an API, run a query), Skills teach an agent how to reason through entire workflows through in-context learning from curated instructions.
```

Simplifying a bit, removing some dashes.

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> > **Note:** This post presents a promising environment design and initial implementation with hypotheses about training behavior. We did not complete a full training run at meaningful scale within the hackathon timeframe — these are design insights, not empirical results.

Reviewer: We could perhaps mention in the tldr that this is part of the Hackathon. And/or write this a bit less defensively, perhaps with something along these lines (just as a suggestion):

```suggestion
> **Note:** This project was part of the PyTorch OpenEnv Hackathon and presents a promising environment design and initial implementation, which are provided as a proof-of-concept. We can draw interesting design insights from the experiment, but this is not a complete solution yet.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> The challenge is reliable invocation. Without it, developers stuff knowledge directly into the system prompt — AGENTS.md, CLAUDE.md — loading everything up front so the agent never has to decide what to retrieve. Vercel's engineering blog (["AGENTS.md outperforms skills in our agent evals"](https://vercel.com/blog/agents-md-outperforms-skills-in-our-agent-evals)) documented exactly this: agents failed to invoke available skills 56% of the time, producing zero improvement over baseline. Even with explicit instructions, skills maxed out at 79%. The workaround — compress everything into an always-loaded system prompt — hits 100% but pushes context cost onto every turn. Progressive disclosure via Skills is the better architecture. Current models just aren't trained to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The challenge is reliable invocation. Without it, developers stuff knowledge directly into the system prompt — AGENTS.md, CLAUDE.md — loading everything up front so the agent never has to decide what to retrieve. Vercel's engineering blog (["AGENTS.md outperforms skills in our agent evals"](https://vercel.com/blog/agents-md-outperforms-skills-in-our-agent-evals)) documented exactly this: agents failed to invoke available skills 56% of the time, producing zero improvement over the baseline. Even with explicit instructions, skills usage maxed out at 79%. The workaround — compress everything into an always-loaded system prompt — hits 100% but pushes context cost onto every turn. Progressive disclosure via Skills is the better architecture. Current models just aren't trained to use it.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

That's the gap our environment closes. We also explored DSPy's GEPA optimizer as a gradient-free alternative to GRPO for the same training signal.

## Why Skills Matter: The SkillsBench Evidence

> The SkillsBench benchmark (Li et al., 2026, [arXiv:2602.12670](https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12670)) measured skill efficacy across 84 tasks, 11 domains, and 7,308 trajectories. Curated Skills raise average pass rate by **+16.2pp**, but effects vary widely (+4.5pp in Software Engineering to +51.9pp in Healthcare), 16 tasks saw degradation, and self-generated Skills provided no benefit (–1.3pp). Skills work when they fill concrete procedural gaps — and models cannot author the procedural knowledge they benefit from consuming.

Reviewer: I'd perhaps move the paper link to a later "resources" section for readability.

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> The SkillsBench benchmark (Li et al., 2026, [arXiv:2602.12670](https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12670)) measured skill efficacy across 84 tasks, 11 domains, and 7,308 trajectories. Curated Skills raise average pass rate by **+16.2pp**, but effects vary widely (+4.5pp in Software Engineering to +51.9pp in Healthcare), 16 tasks saw degradation, and self-generated Skills provided no benefit (–1.3pp). Skills work when they fill concrete procedural gaps — and models cannot author the procedural knowledge they benefit from consuming.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow the "and models cannot author the procedural knowledge they benefit from consuming".

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> This points to three conditions where Skills are irreplaceable — conditions we designed every task around:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This points to three conditions where Skills are irreplaceable:
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> - **Cannot be derived from training data.** Proprietary APIs, custom binary formats — a model has no priors here. This is why our synthetic domains (Zephyr-3, NovaBin, HelixLang, ArcDeploy) are entirely fictional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cannot be derived from training data.** When using proprietary APIs or custom binary formats, the model has no priors. We designed our tasks to use entirely fictional synthetic domains.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> - **Has precise, non-obvious specifications.** Exact byte layouts, HMAC signing formats — being approximately right is just as wrong as being completely wrong. Our verifiers use code execution, not keyword matching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Has precise, non-obvious specifications.** Exact byte layouts, HMAC signing formats: being approximately right is just as wrong as being completely wrong. We use verifiers based on code execution, not keyword matching.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> - **Would be impossible to guess.** Flag bit positions, deployment phase configs — you either have the reference material or you don't. This is where SkillsBench found +51.9pp in Healthcare.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Would be impossible to guess.** Flag bit positions, deployment phase configs — you either have the reference material or you don't. This is what got Healthcare +51.9pp improvement in SkillsBench.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

> The challenge isn't just having curated Skills — it's knowing which ones matter and when. That's the behavior our environment trains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The challenge isn't just having curated Skills, it's knowing which ones matter and when. That's the behavior our environment trains.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

## The Skill Invocation Environment

Every episode presents the agent with a task and a skill catalog (short descriptions only — no full content). The agent decides which skills to load, reads their content, optionally unloads ones that don't apply, and submits a solution. Loading costs context budget. The reward is computed entirely from rule-based checks.

> The catalog gives the agent a lightweight index of available Skills. Full content arrives on demand — loaded when the agent determines a skill is relevant, releasable via unload when it determines it is not. Instead of every skill occupying context on every turn, the agent manages a limited budget and allocates it precisely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I find this a bit repetitive with the previous one; feel free to ignore if you disagree.

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

```
correctness  = 0.6 if answer is correct
precision    = 0.3 × (relevant loaded / total loaded)
recall       = 0.1 × (relevant loaded / total relevant)
bloat        = -0.15 per unnecessary skill at submit
token_waste  = -0.05 per skill ever loaded but irrelevant
total        = max(sum of above, -1.0)
```

The optimal policy is clear: load exactly the right skills, synthesize the correct answer, and submit. The unload action allows exploratory loading without permanent context pollution, as long as the agent cleans up before submitting.

### Tasks: 13 Across 9 Domains

> Three tasks adapted from SkillsBench (Apache 2.0) — Flood Detection, Economics Detrending, Dialogue Parsing. The remaining 10 are synthetic, designed to stress-test generalization: a **TaskGenerator** creates unlimited unique tasks at runtime via two templates (auth_protocol, binary_format) to prevent memorization and ensure the agent cannot rely on seen examples during training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three tasks were adapted from SkillsBench: Flood Detection, Economics Detrending, Dialogue Parsing. The remaining 10 tasks are synthetic, designed to stress-test generalization: a **TaskGenerator** creates unlimited unique tasks at runtime via two templates (auth_protocol, binary_format) to prevent memorization and ensure the agent cannot rely on seen examples during training.
```

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

---
title: "Teaching LLMs When to Use Their Skills: An RL Environment for Skill Invocation"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/upskiller/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: mpnikhil
  guest: true
  org: ""
date: March 24, 2026
---

## TL;DR

We built an RL environment where an agent faces a task and a skill catalog, decides which skills to load into a limited context budget, optionally unloads irrelevant ones, and submits an answer. A five-component rule-based reward trains the agent to be selective and correct, mapping cleanly onto GRPO without a learned reward model.

> ## See It in Action

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is how it works in action:
```

```python
from skill_invocation_env import SkillInvocationEnv, SkillInvocationAction

with SkillInvocationEnv(base_url="https://mpnikhil-skill-invocation-env.hf.space") as env:
    result = env.reset()
    skill_id = result.observation.skill_catalog[0]["id"]
    result = env.step(SkillInvocationAction(action_type="load", skill_id=skill_id))
    result = env.step(SkillInvocationAction(action_type="submit", answer="solution"))
    print(f"Reward: {result.reward}")
```

The environment is deployed as a public HF Space using the [OpenEnv protocol](https://github.com/huggingface/openenv). Any training loop that speaks HTTP can connect and sample episodes. Three actions — **load**, **unload**, **submit** — and a five-component reward that scores correctness, skill selection precision, recall, context bloat, and cumulative token waste.

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 2: Clarify the evidence level up front. 

Right now the post reads a bit like it’s presenting a validated training recipe, but later says the team “didn't complete a full training run at meaningful scale.” I’d suggest an early note in the intro that this is a promising environment/design, with initial implementation + hypotheses, not yet full empirical validation.

> Skills give LLM agents something tools cannot: procedural knowledge at a higher level of abstraction. Where tools execute discrete actions (call an API, run a query), Skills teach an agent how to reason through entire workflows — proprietary protocols, binary formats, deployment sequences — through in-context learning from curated procedural text.

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!

## Design Insights and Open Hypotheses

We didn't complete a full training run at meaningful scale within the hackathon timeframe — these are design hypotheses rather than empirical results.

**The unload action creates a read-then-decide loop.** The agent can read a skill to assess relevance, then release it before submitting. Whether this trains robustly is something we'd want to verify with longer runs.

**Context budget beats binary invoke/don't-invoke.** A budget allocation model better reflects real constraints and should produce a richer reward signal.

**GEPA and RL are complementary.** The natural workflow is to use GEPA first to discover effective prompt structures, then RL to encode that behavior into weights. We'd like to measure whether the two stages compound.

## upskill — Closing the Skill Generation Loop

> Ben Burtenshaw's [upskill](https://github.com/huggingface/upskill) (Hugging Face) handles skill authoring: a powerful model writes and refines SKILL.md files, then validates them on smaller models. Robin Hood — expensive frontier models write the skills, cheaper open models consume them.

Author: Addressed in latest commit. Thanks!
